# Scripts used for the documentation

The following scripts are used in the automatic compilation of the trustable report.

## capture_test_data.py

The python-script [capture_test_data.py](capture_test_data.py) is intended to run at the end of the [ubuntu-workflow](../../.github/workflows/ubuntu.yml). It collects and combines the test-results that were collected in the individual jobs, appends the persistent test data storage and generates a database containing the results of the most recent tests only. Since storage space on GitHub is limited, the storage of test data is limited to two weeks only. It must be noted that this implementation is only intended as a temporary proof of concept!

## capture_test_data_memory_sensitive.py

The python script [capture_test_data_memory_sensitive.py](capture_test_data_memory_sensitive.py) is an alternative to [capture_test_data.py](capture_test_data.py), which is more memory sensitive. 
Instead of capturing the full test-data, a first snapshot of the data is captured, which is then updated whenever a relevant change is detected.

The characterisation of "relevant change" follows the following heuristic argumentation: 

* The execution time of each test is of lesser interest, therefore it is not continuously updated.
* A test is uniquely identified by the columns ctest_target, name and cpp_standard.

Moreover, a size-check is performed on the persistent storage, using the following heuristic assumptions 

* It is expected, that an update of a test-result only happens, when a test fails, which leads automatically to the failure of the pipeline, which should trigger a manual review by the maintainer, or failed before.
* It is expected, that tests fail rarely, and in particular on average less than 10 different test-cases per workflow-run fail.
* It is expected, that less than 1,000 workflow runs, where a record of the test-result is triggered, happen per year, since these are only triggered once daily and on each push to main.
* It is expected, that a ten-year-record of test-results is sufficient for documentation purposes.

In view of these assumptions, we limit the storage to approximately 100,000 test-results and 100,000 workflow-metadata, which guarantees *en passant* that GitHub's file size limit of 100MB is respected.
In the worst case that every recorded test result is detected as a relevant change, this restraint collects test-results from 27 workflows in total.
Whenever either limit of 100,000 test-results and 100,000 workflow-metadata in the persistent data storage is violated, the script returns the error "The persistent data storage is too large! Please move persistent data to external storage.", thereby failing the workflow, which advises the maintainer to take up action.

## clean_trudag_report.py

The python-script [clean_trudag_report.py](clean_trudag_report.py) runs at the end of generate_report.sh.
By default, the report generated by trudag has the format that is expected by MkDocs.
This format, however, is not properly rendered by sphinx, so that an adaption of the output is necessary.
This adaption happens within this script.

## generate_report.sh

The shell-script [generate_report.sh](generate_report.sh) is used to generate the trustable report and the graphs of which the documentation consists.
In particular, it first cleans up potentially left-over obsolete reports, then generates the report and the full view of the trustable graph using trudag.
Thereafter, plot_partial_graphs.py is called, before finally clean_trudag_report.py is executed.

## plot_partial_graphs.py

The python-script [plot_partial_graphs.py](plot_partial_graphs.py) is used to generate a myriad of partial graphs with links amongst them.
These are then used to augment the full graph, which is, due to its size, quite hard to display, in the documentation.
By the means of the links of the items, a more or less \"navigable\" version of the trustable graph is created, which displays a handful of items at a time, only.

# Helper-scripts for offline development

## fetch_json.cpp

The C++ script [fetch_json.cpp](fetch_json.cpp) is used to extract lists of paths to json testsuites from unit-testsuites.cpp, which are then used in testsuite-references. This script is purely used during the manual compilation of the references.

## generate_documentation.sh

The shell-script [generate_documentation.sh](generate_documentation.sh) generates a locally hosted version of the documentation, which is used for testing purposes.

## generate_list_of_tests.py

The python script [generate_list_of_tests.py](generate_list_of_tests.py) is used to generate the [list_of_test_environments.md](../docs/list_of_test_environments.md) listing the expected test-cases with their execution environments.
The file [list_of_test_environments.md](../docs/list_of_test_environments.md) is then persistently stored within the documentation.
Additionally, this script is utilised within the validator ``check_list_of_tests`` to generate a list of test environments from the most recent test results and to compare this list with the persistently stored one.
In case that new tests are added, tests are removed or test environments change, it is therefore necessary to have an accurate list_of_test_environments.md, which is highly recommended to be generated using this script.
To run the script, the database `MemoryEfficientTestResults.db` must be downloaded from the artifact of the most recent successful ubuntu workflow, and placed in the folder `artifacts` in the root of the repository.
Moreover, it must be ensured that this script is run from within the root of the repository, only. 

## generate_subgraph_plots.sh

The shell-script [generate_subgraph_plots.sh](generate_subgraph_plots.sh) is used to generate subgraphs of the trustable graph using trudag plot with the --pick option. 
Since the options of adding custom hyperlinks to the individual nodes of the generated subgraphs are not quite as flexible as desired for the \"navigable\" version of the trustable graph, we opted to use the custom script plot_partial_graphs.py.
